.TH SOVEREIGN-OSCTL 1 "July 2026" "sovereign-os" "Operator Commands"
.SH NAME
sovereign-osctl \- manage the sovereign-os lifecycle
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sovereign-osctl
.I command
.RI [ subcommand ]
.RI [ arguments ]
.PP
.B sovereign-osctl
.RB { help | version }
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sovereign-osctl
is the operator-facing entry point for inspecting, configuring, auditing,
maintaining, and decommissioning a sovereign-os installation.
It selects the active profile from
.I /etc/sovereign-os/active-profile
and defaults to
.B sain-01
when that file is absent.
.PP
Commands that mutate system state are explicitly gated. Read the plan or status
form first, and use root privileges only where the selected command requires them.
The complete, version-matched command inventory is available through
.BR "sovereign-osctl help" .
.SH CORE COMMANDS
.TP
.B status [--json]
Show a system state overview. JSON output is suitable for fleet aggregation.
.TP
.B doctor
Run profile-conditioned sanity checks across the installed system.
.TP
.B assistant [full|status|reset|list]
Run or inspect the first-login assistant.
.TP
.B init [--non-interactive]
Run the setup wizard and write
.IR .sovereign-os/init-state.yaml .
.TP
.B overview
Show the consolidated operator overview.
.SH PROFILES AND CUSTOMIZATION
.TP
.B profiles list|show|show-effective|compare|fork|active|switch|validate
Inspect, compare, create, activate, and validate OS profiles.
.TP
.B whitelabel show|apply|list|diff
Inspect or apply operator-owned branding.
.TP
.B hooks list|add|remove
Manage profile lifecycle hooks.
.TP
.B env list|show
Discover supported
.B SOVEREIGN_OS_*
configuration variables and their consumers.
.SH AI AND RUNTIME
.TP
.B models
Query, select, pull, verify, evaluate, fine-tune, and remove models.
Use
.B sovereign-osctl help
for the complete model command tree.
.TP
.B inference
Manage local inference surfaces.
.TP
.B gateway [--addr host:port] [--json]
Probe the sovereign provider-inversion gateway.
.TP
.B frontend status|list|set
Inspect or switch the boot frontend.
.TP
.B openclaw status|on|off|install|backend|logs|doctor
Manage the OpenClaw agent runtime and its local/Anthropic backend selection.
.TP
.B open-computer status|on|off|install|backend|url|logs|doctor
Manage the open-computer QEMU AI sandbox.
.TP
.B trinity
Inspect and operate Pulse, Weaver, and Auditor.
.TP
.B science
Inspect and run the non-LLM science tool surface.
.SH SECURITY AND AUDIT
.TP
.B perimeter status|verify|reload
Inspect or reload the Tetragon perimeter.
.TP
.B selfdef
Operate the selfdef intrusion-prevention integration.
.TP
.B audit friction|perimeter|storage|provenance|drift|customization
Run hardware, security, storage, provenance, and configuration audits.
.TP
.B secure-boot gen-keys|status
Generate operator-owned Secure Boot keys or inspect enrollment state.
.TP
.B permission
Classify a command under the manual, auto, or bypass approval mode.
.TP
.B auth-tier
Inspect and manage dashboard authentication tiers.
.TP
.B compliance
Inspect the consolidated compliance surface.
.SH OPERATIONS
.TP
.B maintenance
Run on-demand storage, logging, security, model, perimeter, and alert maintenance.
.TP
.B metrics
Inspect exported sovereign-os metrics.
.TP
.B journal
Inspect the sovereign-os journal and error surfaces.
.TP
.B history
Inspect recorded operator history.
.TP
.B thermals
Inspect thermal state.
.TP
.B alerts
Show rule-derived alerts.
.TP
.B install image [--plan] image --to device
Plan or write a built image to a target device. The write path refuses the
running root device and requires the explicit destructive confirmation gate.
.TP
.B decommission --plan
Preview all decommission phases without changing state.
.TP
.B decommission start
Begin the interactive, confirmation-gated decommission flow.
.SH GOVERNANCE AND DISCOVERY
.TP
.B doc-coverage
Inspect documentation coverage by operator-facing module.
.TP
.B surface-map
Inspect module coverage across core, CLI, TUI, API, MCP, dashboard, web, and service surfaces.
.TP
.B ux-design-audit
Audit operator-facing modules against the UX contract.
.TP
.B anti-minimization-audit
Scan for known minimization patterns and explicit waivers.
.TP
.B architecture-qa
Inspect architecture questions and their status.
.TP
.B coverage
Inspect implementation coverage.
.TP
.B layers
Inspect the project layer model.
.TP
.B search
Search project knowledge from the operator surface.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SOVEREIGN_OS_LIB
Override the library directory. It must contain
.IR lib/common.sh .
.TP
.B SOVEREIGN_OS_PROFILE
Override the active OS profile for the current invocation.
.TP
.B SOVEREIGN_OS_CONFIRM_DESTROY
Must be set to
.B YES
for destructive image installation after the plan and device safety checks pass.
.PP
Additional variables are discoverable with
.BR "sovereign-osctl env list" .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/sovereign-os/active-profile
Installed active-profile selector.
.TP
.I /usr/local/lib/sovereign-os
Default installed library tree.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/sovereign-os
Legacy library location.
.TP
.I /opt/sovereign-os
Alternate vendor tree used by installed services.
.TP
.I .sovereign-os/init-state.yaml
Setup-wizard state in a repository or operator working directory.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
sovereign-osctl status --json
sovereign-osctl doctor
sovereign-osctl profiles show-effective sain-01
sovereign-osctl models suggest --runtime-profile high-concurrency --json
sovereign-osctl audit provenance --deep build/sain-01/output/build-provenance.json
sovereign-osctl install image --plan build/sain-01/output/sain-01.raw --to /dev/nvme1n1
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
Zero indicates success. Non-zero indicates invalid input, a failed check,
an unavailable dependency, a refused safety gate, or an operational failure.
Some audit and coverage commands use status 2 to report detected gaps.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR journalctl (1),
.BR zpool (8),
.BR zfs (8),
.BR podman (1)
.PP
Project documentation:
.I docs/src/ops/manage.md
and
.IR docs/src/operator-journey.md .
.SH AUTHORS
The sovereign-os project contributors.
.SH LICENSE
AGPL-3.0-or-later.
